---
title: 'Visualizing Algorithms with Manim'
date: 2022-12-29
permalink: /posts/algorithms-visualization-manim/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

This is a sample blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

What's Manim?
======

Manim is a Python graphics library for creating mathematics animations. Originally created by Grant Sanderson, host of the excellent [3blue1brown](https://www.youtube.com/@3blue1brown) youtube channel, it now exists in two flavours: the [community edition](https://www.manim.community/) and the [original project](https://3b1b.github.io/manim/). Although they both have their strengths, I chose to work with the community edition as it has a reputation for being better documented and being more beginner friendly.

Manim is useful for quickly creating impressive animations and visualizations of mathematical concepts. It's a great tool to liven up presentations and I find that its strength lies in giving examples to illustrate new concepts. Through playing around with manim, I've discovered it's surprisingly easy to illustrate any "action" through animation. So easy, in fact, that it can be hard not to resist putting these animations everywhere.

Moving slightly away from its applications to math visualization, I've found that manim is also very good at presenting algorithms. Here are a few reasons why.

### Managing focus

One of the frustrations of learning a new algorithm is having to keep all of the elements in mind while imagining their actions, even when said elements are inactive. Because we haven't understood the algorithm yet, we are forced to retain information that might not be relevant to the current state of the algorithm. Take keeping track of the elements of a set, or remembering what state we last updated, for example.

The simple act of making elements fade in or out during an animation guides the viewer. For example, when an element fades out, the viewer intuitively knows that it becomes irrelevant for the next steps. Furthermore, all of the relevant information can be kept on the screen, this leads to more focus being put on how the elements interact rather than what the values of these elements are.

### Ease of creation

Animating an algorithms usually follows directly from an implementation of said algorithm. Because the animations are created using code, a straightforward way to represent an algorithm is to give every action the algorithm makes a corresponding animation. For example, it took less than 20 lines of code to create a shuffling method for a deck of cards object which returns an animation which looks like this:
<center>
<video autoplay loop muted inline style="width:70%;">
  <source src="/files/animations/shuffle.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>
</center>

It is important to note that Manim is designed with object oriented programming in mind. I've personally found this to fit the python language and the animation use case quite well.

### Intuition over implementation

The final point I would like to make is that these animations are most useful as a tool for demonstration.

Examples
======

## Graph Algorithm

## Sliding Window Algorithm

## Cryptographic Protocol

